the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
if you haven't uh clicked in yet please
pay attention to the clicker question
and I'll give you a little bit more time
to to click in and I'll give you a
10-second warning
all right let's let's just go ahead and
take 10 more seconds
all right
does someone want to say how they how
they got this one right have anyone
willing to say how they got it right we
have a American Chemical Society
whatever these are called that hang
around your neck and clip things to them
yes there's the word now oh there we go
okay so this molecule is though
phosphorus has five valence electrons
and then each hydrogen has three so it's
for a total of eight so it has three
bonding and then one lone pair which
makes it a tetrahedral but then the lone
pair push the other bonds so it's less
than 109.5 degrees excellent yeah so I
see that some people just decided that
there were three things bound to it and
so then then they decided either 120 or
less than 120 but you really need to do
the lewis structure and see how many
lone pairs there are first so once you
do the lewis structure then you figure
out the parent geometry s enforces some
more tetrahedral system alright so more
more practice on on these coming up all
right so we're continuing on now with
molecular orbital theory and we started
the course talking about atomic
structure and then we talked about
atomic orbitals or wave functions and
then we moved on to bonding that atoms
can come together and bond and talked
about the structure of molecules and now
we're going to molecular orbitals so and
then we'll also talk more about the
structure of molecules based on those
molecular orbitals on Wednesday so we're
really coming all the way around we're
using a lot of the ideas that you've
seen before but now we're applying them
to molecules and then to me this is
really an exciting part I love getting
up to the molecules and talking about
structures and molecules and how
orbitals really play a role in those
properties that molecules have and then
to me the really exciting I like
reactions so after we finish with the
structures we're going to talk more
about how molecules react and so on
Friday we're going to be starting that
reactions and molecules and getting into
thermodynamics so we're sort of winding
our way away from orbitals for a while
we will come back
two D orbitals around Thanksgiving time
but we'll have a long time before that
where we're talking about reactions so
we're about to kind of do a transition
in the type of material but before we do
that more orbitals but these are super
cool because these are molecular
orbitals so we're going to talk today
about mo Theory mo for molecular
orbitals so molecular orbital Theory
presents the idea that these valence
electrons are really going to be
delocalized around these molecules and
not just sitting on individual atoms so
to think about this electron
delocalization we need to think about
molecular orbitals molecular orbitals as
we've learned another word for orbitals
also wave functions wave functions or
orbitals orbitals or wave functions you
need to consider the wave-like
properties of electrons to think about
where the electrons are going to be what
is their probability density how are
they going to be arranged with respect
to the nucleus and so we take atomic
orbitals and we bring them together as
atoms come together to form bonds atomic
orbitals come together to form molecular
orbitals so we're going to be adding
superimposing atomic orbitals to form
these molecular orbitals and this is
called a linear combination of atomic
orbitals or lcao and so we're going to
bring those atomic orbitals together and
create molecular orbitals and we're
going to create two types of molecular
orbitals we're going to create bonding
and antibonding and some basic math
principles apply here and that is that
you can create n atomic orbitals from n
and molecular orbitals from n n atomic
orbitals all right so that's really the
basis of molecular orbital theory and
now let's apply it to our friends the S
orbitals all right so we're going to
think about really simple molecules
bringing together two atoms that are
identical with each other
and what happens to their s-orbitals
when this happens so first we'll talk
about bonding orbitals so bonding
orbitals again rise from this linear
combination of atomic orbitals the lcao
and if it's a bonding orbital it's going
to arise from constructive interference
so we talked before about the properties
of waves and one of the great properties
of waves is that they can constructively
interfere destructively interfere and
orbitals are wave functions so they can
constructively interfere and
destructively interfere bonding orbitals
are generated by the constructive
interference so let's look at two atomic
orbitals and so here we have an orbital
the nucleus is in the middle so little
thought is the nucleus and these two
atomic orbitals are going to come
together there's going to be a bonding
event and so we have a 1s orbital from
from atom a and a 1s orbital from atom B
and they're going to come together and
they're going to form a molecular
orbital an a/b molecular orbital and
this is called Sigma 1s so a sigma
orbital is symmetric around the bond
axis so the bond axis here would be just
a vertical aligned between these two
nuclei here and so this molecular
orbital is symmetric around that bond
axis there are no nodal planes for
something that is symmetric there are no
nodal planes for our s orbitals and so
there's none for the molecular orbital
either and we can also write this as 1sa
plus 1sb so the atomic orbital from one
si the atomic orbital one SP coming
together to form Sigma orbital one s
that is a bonding orbital because it's
constructive interference it's a bonding
mo or molecular orbital so now let's
consider the wave-like properties and
think about these atomic orbitals coming
too
as waves and what is happening so here
we have the same equation up here we're
bringing together one si and one SB but
now let's think about this as a wave
function so there is an amplitude
associated with the wave function for
one si and there is an amplitude
one SB these wave functions come
together here's one nuclei here's the
other nuclei and for a bonding orbital
it'll be constructive interference and
so the amplitude where these wave
functions atomic wave functions overlap
will be increased when you have
constructive interference so our Sigma
1s now has increased amplitude between
these two nuclei due to that
constructive interference so an
increased amplitude between these two
nuclei again this is the bonding axis
here's one nuclei here's another so an
increased amplitude here in create
corresponds to an increased or enhanced
probability density remember our wave
function squared is probability density
it suggests the likelihood of finding an
electron in a certain region of volume
and if it's enhanced by this
constructive interference so if that
density probability density is enhanced
you have a greater chance of finding an
electron between these two nuclei which
will be attracted by both nuclei so now
why don't you tell me what you think is
going to happen to an electron that is
in this region of constructive
interference this increased area of
probability density
okay ten more seconds
interesting
okay so we should have probably not put
up the answer there and repol so yes so
here if we have an electron that's
attracted to both nuclei then we want to
think about whether that's going to be
lower or higher in energy than something
in an atomic orbital so if it's
attracted to both it's going to be more
stable II bound to those it'll be harder
to remove that electron which means that
it's lower down in energy and so we
should look at that and we're going to
so the answer is it should be lower in
energy more stable harder to remove that
electron it's in a sweet spot it has two
positively charged nuclei and it's kind
of hanging out right in the middle it's
very happy it's gonna be more stable and
that means lower in energy all right so
let's take a look at that so the
electron is lower in energy and the
bonding orbital energy is also going to
be decreased compared to the atomic
orbitals and that has to be true if
that's where the electron is so let's
look at the atomic orbital from a and
the atomic orbital from B and now I'm
going to put the bonding orbital at a
lower energy level first so I was going
to put the electrons on and now I'm
going to put the orbital and a lower at
a lower energy so remember this is
increasing energy here so the atomic
orbitals would be up here whereas the
molecular orbital is down here molecular
bonding orbital will be lower in energy
and now we'll put our electrons there so
we have one electron up here and one
here and so when they come together
we're going to have two electrons in
this molecular orbital so when you have
these two electrons and they both occupy
the bonding orbital and this is
the case for h2 each H Adam is bringing
one electron h2 has these two electrons
and that's gonna make h2 more stable and
we saw that before that you have to
dissociate the h2 bonds you have to add
energy into the system h2 is more stable
than free h plus h so when you bring
atomic orbitals together and you have
constructive interference an increased
probability of electrons between those
two nuclei that's a sweet spot they're
gonna those electrons are gonna be very
happy there and that will result in a
more stable lower energy structure
that's bonding but whenever there is a
positive event like this there's always
a negative event cuz that's just how
life works so we have bonding orbitals
but we also have antibonding orbitals so
antibonding orbitals arise from the
linear combination of atomic orbitals
lcao through destructive interference so
here these are going to be destructively
interfering and that will generate a
molecular orbital that is an antibonding
orbital so here our little nuclei again
and this antibonding orbital is called
Sigma 1s star so we can write an
equation for this as one si minus one s
B equals Sigma 1s star that is an
antibonding molecular orbital and let's
just think about how this kind of shape
arises considering the wave-like
properties of these atomic orbitals so
I'm going to now move this equation up
to the top and now I have my one at one
si here my one s be here and now its
destructive interference so we have
opposite phase
of the wavefunctions and when we'll put
up a wave function there now the next
one has the another the opposite phase
so they're going to destructively
interfere there is overlap over here but
when you have destructive interference
then the amplitude is going to decrease
so now when we consider this destructive
interference between these two orbitals
you see that you have what arises
between them instead of enhanced
probability of finding an electron you
actually get a node so you have
decreased amplitude translates to
decrease probability density between
these two nuclei one here one here and
that results in a node between the two
nuclei so in the antibonding orbital
there's even there's a lower probability
that it will be in this sweet spot
between these two between the two nuclei
that have this nice positive charge for
its little negative charge so there's
pretty much no shot at being in that
nice sweet spot and so what that ends up
meaning is that an electron in an
antibonding orbital is pretty much
excluded from that inter nuclear region
that region between those two nuclei and
that results in a molecular orbital that
has higher energy than the atomic
orbital there's just no chance of being
in that wonderful spot it's really very
sad for the poor electron that has to
occupy an antibonding orbital so now
let's put this on our energy scale so
we'll go back to our energy scale and we
saw before that when we had one SI + 1
SP and you had a sigma one as a bonding
orbital that was lower in energy
electrons that occupy it are more stable
compared to their positions in the
atomic orbital but we also now have an
antibonding orbital from destructive in
farrance between the wave functions of
the atomic orbitals and that's higher in
energy and so that's up here so this is
what our diagram is going to look like
that brings two atomic orbitals together
to create two molecular orbitals so the
antibonding orbital up here is raised in
energy by the same amount that the
bonding energy is lowered and so that
gives rise to this diagram and
importantly as I mentioned we have n
atomic orbitals forming and molecular
orbitals so if you have two atomic
orbitals we generate two molecular
orbitals one is bonding lower in energy
and one is anti-bonding higher in energy
all right so let's take a look at some
examples so always start with hydrogen
so hydrogen has how many electrons one
hydrogen hydrogen atom one so we have
two hydrogen atoms and so we have two 1s
orbitals 1s a 1s B and now we're going
to where do we want to put our electrons
and the highest energy possible lower
energy where do we want to put them all
we start with lower energy so we're
gonna put them down here and so this is
now the mo diagram for h2 and we can
write the electron configuration for the
mo diagram which you'll note is a
different electron configuration than
you were writing when you were looking
at the periodic table because now we're
not writing it in terms of 1s2 2s2 we're
writing it in terms of molecular
orbitals and there's some of these on
the problem set and I tried to indicate
example to make sure you know what kind
of electron configurations we're talking
about
so for mo diagrams when it says electron
configuration we're talking about where
the
electrons are with respect to the
molecular orbitals so the answer to this
would be Sigma 1 s 2 there are two
electrons in the molecular orbital Sigma
1s good so that means that you can do
the same thing for dye helium and that's
a clicker question
let's just take 10 more seconds
okay yep all right so so someone want to
tell me that is correct
what what's number two what's number two
four four hydrogen okay
what about number three what was what
was wrong there okay everyone's doing
really well yeah so we had all of the
electrons are were parallel in there and
what what what is that violate what
would be true in that case yup and so we
they'd have they'd have the same four
principal quantum numbers this is not
allowed so that one's not good and
what's wrong with four yes star was on
the bottom so they were flipped around
antibonding was lower in energy great
okay so we'll just put those in over
here and so we had two electrons helium
brings two so two went into the bonding
and two went into the antibonding with
opposite spins and we have bonding
lower-energy antibonding higher energy
alright so then we can put in the
electron configuration here and we have
Sigma 1s 2 Sigma 1s star - so that's the
electron configuration now interestingly
you see you have two at lower energy and
two at higher energy so there's no net
loss or gain in energy of h2 compared to
just two helium atoms and so that raises
the question does helium 2 exist so what
would molecular orbital Theory tell you
about whether it exists and it would
actually predict that it does not
exist and the way that molecular orbital
Theory gives you these predictions is
through the calculation of something
called bond order so bond order is half
of the number of bonding electrons minus
the number of antibonding electrons so
let's just write out what the bond order
for helium would be so helium 2 our die
helium molecule so we have bond order
equals 1/2 there's always a half and now
the number of bonding electrons so how
many bonding electrons do we have for
helium - how many antibonding electrons
do we have for die helium - and can
someone do this math for me zero right
so that would suggest a bond order of
zero which means no bond and let's just
compare that to hydrogen h2 which should
have a bond order equal to 1/2 it's
always a half in the hydrogen
how many bonding electrons did we have
we had two how many antibonding
electrons do we have zero and the math
bond order is 1 so that means one bond
or a single bond so mo theory would
predict that die helium has no bond ie
it's not really a molecule without a
bond but h2 should exist so let's take a
look at what experiment tells us and it
does exist but only really not that much
so it was not discovered until 1993
which for some of you might seem like
quite a long time ago but since we've
been mostly talking about discoveries
that were made in the 1800s
it took a long time before someone could
prove that da helium existed and if we
look at the bond dissociation energy for
h2 0.01 and compare that to h2 432 the
helium really doesn't exist very much
zero is a much better approximation of
its bond than one would be it really is
not a very good molecule so I would call
this a win for molecular orbital theory
it correctly predicts that h2 is not
going to be a very good molecule our
helium 2 is not going to be a very good
molecule but h2 will be a good molecule
and that that works all right so now
let's consider 2 s so 2's orbitals are
analogous to 1s except that you have to
remember that they're bigger so we have
our 1 s and r 2s but for the purposes of
this it doesn't really matter so let's
look at a diagram now that has 1s and 2s
so we have lithium so how many electrons
does lithium have yep
so we'll put on lithium dilithium we'll
put on lithium's
it has 2 in 1s and 1 into s and so we
have one lithium here and one lithium
over here and our 1s orbitals are going
to be lower in energy so they're down
here
our 2's orbitals are higher in energy so
that goes for both the atomic and the
molecular orbitals that are generated so
bringing together 1s with 1s we get
Sigma 1s and also Sigma star 1s and so
we can start putting our electrons in
we're going to start with the lowest
energy and move up so we have 4
electrons that we need to put in so we
fill up everything here
and now we go up to our 2s the 2's
orbitals will generate Sigma 2 s and
Sigma 2 s star we have two electrons so
they both can go down here so here is
what our mo diagram looks like we can
write out the electron configuration
again based on this diagram so we have
two electrons in Sigma 1s so we have a 2
there we have two electrons in Sigma 1s
star or antibonding orbital and we have
two electrons in Sigma 2's and now we
can calculate the bond order which is
another clicker question
okay just ten more seconds
excellent 84% so if we do out the math
here we always have our 1/2 we have 4
bonding electrons we have 2 down here
and 2 up here we have two antibonding
electrons in our Sigma 1s star and so
that gives us a bond order of 1 and in
fact the dissociation energy does
suggest there is a bond it's not a great
bond it's a hundred and five kilojoules
per mole
not necessarily enough to power a
starship but still this molecule does
exist all right so let's look at
beryllium now do another example so how
many electrons is beryllium gonna have
it'll have four so we'll put those up
now we're going to start with our lowest
energy orbital and we're gonna put some
in the antibonding as well and then
we'll do this and then we'll do that and
we filled up everything and so we can
write out our configuration we have two
in our sigma 1s orbital we have two in
our sigma 1s star we have two in our
Sigma 2 s and 2 in our Sigma 2's star
antibonding orbital there and now there
are two different ways that I can
calculate the bond order here and we'll
do both of them and show you that they
come out the same way one way that we
can calculate this is to consider all
electrons so if we consider all
electrons our bond order and that's
often just said be period o is 1/2 of
our bonding and now we can count up both
the 1s and the 2s so how many bonding
electrons do we have we should have four
so we have two here two here so for how
many antibonding also four so that
suggests a bond order of zero or we
could just consider our valence
electrons so that would be the the
electrons in 2's and if we do that bond
order equals 1/2 it's always a half so
how many valence electrons do we have in
bonding orbitals
- how many an antibonding orbitals - and
that gives the answer of zero so should
always work unless you did something
very strange you should be able to do it
both ways and get the same answer so if
this is a complicated problem you might
want to only consider the valence
electrons in fact on the test you may
only be a asked to draw the molecular
orbital diagrams for the valence
electrons and you don't have to do the
other the other ones ok so that should
work both ways and we get a bond order
of zero and in fact the dissociation
energy is only nine kilojoules per mole
it's a little stronger than dye helium
but this is an exceedingly weak molecule
so when you have the same number of
electrons in bonding as anti-bonding
doesn't lead to a very strong model
molecule all right that's the S orbitals
now it's time for molecules that have P
orbitals as well so in this case now I
have my p orbital and another p orbital
and we have our nuclei in the middle and
we're going to bring these together and
we will have constructive interference
and so here we're bringing together two
P X of a + 2 P X B or 2 py a + 2 py B so
just x + y we're can see
right now and if we bring those together
with constructive interference then
we're going to form a bonding orbital
that has enhanced probability density in
both cases and a nodal plane along the
bond axis because we had nodal planes
along there to begin with so if we think
about this and we have both of these or
bringing them together and we're going
to have they're going to interfere
constructively enhance probability
density here enhance probability density
down here but we still have our nodal
plane because we started out with one
and so if we have a nodal plane this
cannot be a sigma orbital it has to be a
PI orbital because Sigma orbitals are
not going to have a nodal plane along
the bonding access all right so we could
generate pi 2px or PI 2p why this way so
a PI orbital is a molecular orbital that
has a nodal plane through the bond axis
or maybe I should say along the bond
axis so here's our nodal plane right
through the bond axis we can also have
antibonding which means destructive
interference so now I'm going to be
subtracting one of these from one of
these and I'm gonna get something that
looks like this and it will be PI 2p x
star or PI 2 P Y star and it will have
two nodal planes so let's look at this
so this is destructive interference I'm
subtracting one of these from one of
these so the phase has to change so I'm
going to change the phase on one of them
and then bring them together
now we're not going to have that awesome
constructive interference increased
increased probability density the
are negatively interacting with each
other and this generates a nodal plane
between the molecules they really look
much more like this now so we have still
our nodal plane through the bond we had
that before we're always going to have
that but now we have an additional nodal
plane between the nuclei so in one case
we have enhanced density probability
density again and the other case in
antibonding we have another nodal plane
all right so now let's look at what
happens to the energies of these PI
orbitals and the diagrams that I'm about
to show you we're only talking about px
and py now we have for the moment
forgotten - PZ so these diagrams are
rated I for incomplete warning to the
viewer people come to me and go where
where are the two PZ yes they're not in
these diagrams but when you're asked for
a complete diagram you will always have
to put those orbitals in and in fact
completing these diagrams could be a
question you get later okay but for now
we're gonna have two PZ here but we
don't have it's not forming a molecular
orbital in this diagram this diagram is
thus incomplete but we're going to start
simple and build more complicated so
only only two P orbitals first and then
we'll add the third one because this
compound doesn't actually need that
orbital so we're good for now alright so
we have moved on to the first element
that has a P electron in AP orbital we
have boron and we have two of them so
now I dropped off one s to simplify this
so we're starting just with now we just
have our valence electrons so it's a
good thing we can calculate bond order
just using our valence electrons alright
so we have two into s and 1 into P X or
2 py I could have put it either place so
let's put in where they would go so we
have two s orbitals they'll four
go into bonding Sigma 2's first then
into antibonding Sigma 2's star and now
we have P P electrons and we're going to
put them into our PI orbitals our
molecular orbitals I'll put one in and
where am I gonna put the other one am I
gonna put it next to it or over here I
think yeah so we're gonna do that
because again when you're going to sit
on a bus you want to have if they're
degenerate in energy levels as they are
here you're always going to put one
electron in each orbital of the same
energy first before you pair them up and
they'll have parallel spins so we're
reviewing things we learned before I
love doing that ok so now let's see what
our electron configuration is and this
is just the valence electron
configuration we're simplifying we're
not going to consider the 1 the 1s
orbital and we can write this down so we
have two electrons in Sigma 2's and we
have two electrons in Sigma 2's star
antibonding orbital and we have one in
pi 2px and 1 and PI 2 P Y and I don't
put I can put a 1 or not put a 1 if I
don't put anything 4 1 1 is assumed and
we can calculate our bond order as well
so we have 1/2 and again we're just
using our valence electrons but that's
ok we have 4 now who are bonding to down
here to up here these are bonding
orbitals and we have two that are
antibonding and notice for our PI
orbitals this is what we saw before
bonding or lower in energy antibonding
or higher in energy with the bonding
orbitals we had constructive
interference enhanced probability of the
electrons near the nuclei and so that's
lower in energy but in our anti-bonding
ones we have a nodal plane in between
our nuclei so we don't have any
probability that electrons are right in
between there because
a nodal plane so those are higher in
energy okay so here is our b2 diagram so
now let's try the same thing for carbon
c2 and that is a clicker question
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
okay
so let's take a look at that over here
the easiest thing to do to answer this
question was to fill in the diagram in
your handout and so if you did that you
would have put two down here and you
would have put two up here then you
would have put one here one there
another one there and another one there
okay so now we have used these up and so
our configuration is Sigma 2 s 2 Sigma
star 2 pi 2px 2 pi 2py 2 and the bond
order is 1/2 there are six bonding
electrons 1 2 3 4 5 6 and two
antibonding electrons and so that adds
up to a bond order of two and so
sometimes on a test there'll be a simple
question what is the bond order but to
get there you have to draw your whole
molecular orbital diagram and figure out
how many bonding and how many
antibonding so these are not really that
fast questions and it's nice sometimes
we give you like a little space and you
see this whole little molecular orbital
diagram like fit in there to answer the
question all right so let's just compare
these two diagrams for a minute so in
both cases we had two s orbitals two
atomic orbitals four 2s and they both
generated two molecular orbitals a
bonding and in antibonding the bonding
is lower in energy and the antibonding
is higher in energy we also had two 2px
atomic orbitals they generated two pi
2px orbitals one bonding one antibonding
and the same for our two atomic orbitals
for 2p why we had two of those and they
Jen
one lower-energy bonding PI bonding and
one pi star antibonding so you always
have an atomic orbitals generating and
molecular orbitals so the stability of
the resulting molecules in these cases
depend on how many of the electrons are
bonding how many are in lower energy as
a result of formation of the molecule
and how many are at higher energy as a
result of formation of the molecule and
if the net result are more electrons in
lower energy more electrons in bonding
orbitals then that molecule is more
stable if there's a very slight or kind
of no difference then that's not a very
stable molecule so now let's just
compare these two and think about which
of these is going to be more stable
so we have our configurations again so
in the case of B 2 how many electrons
are in lower energy or bonding orbitals
yep we have 4 1 2 3 4 how many in higher
to up here 4 carbon we had 6 1 2 3 4 5 6
2 and higher and so the bond order here
was 1 the bond order here was 2 which is
more stable higher dissociation energy
which one do you think carbon right has
a bond order of two it has more
electrons in lower energy orbitals so it
came out really well out of this bonding
deal and the dissociation energy for B 2
289 whereas for C 2 599 so when
molecules come together such that more
of the electrons are in lower energy or
bonding orbitals you form a nice stable
molecule when molecules come together
such that more of their electrons are an
antibonding or higher energy that's not
a happy molecule so I'll just end
one way to think about this in this
cartoon molecular breakup lines
sometimes two atoms just have an
incompatible number of valence electrons
and they're just too many you just hear
this molecule saying I'm sorry too many
of your electrons are in my antibonding
regions
I don't know how many times we've all
heard that but you know it's time to
dissociate but our atomic orbitals well
they can still be friends okay see you
on Wednesday
take a look at the clicker question
all right let's let's just take 10 more
seconds
all right let's just go through this one
so this is a review of where we were
last time but so the correct answer is
one so Sigma orbitals are cylindrical
asymmetrical it's quiet down a minute
you can hear hear the answer so this one
is true the second one is not true a
bond order of zero doesn't mean that you
just have antibonding orbitals whenever
you bring together two atomic orbitals
you have to make two molecular orbitals
so it isn't that sometimes you make
bonding orbitals and sometimes you make
antibonding orbitals every time you
bring together two atomic orbitals you
make two molecular orbitals one that's
lower in energy and that's the bonding
orbital and one that's higher in energy
and that's the antibonding orbital so so
that is not what that means a bond order
of zero means that you have equal
numbers of electrons in your bonding and
antibonding orbitals so there's no net
stabilization due to the formation of of
these bonds so here bonding occurs when
you bring together two atomic orbitals
to make two molecular orbitals that are
both of lower energy no every time you
make the two orbitals one is lower in
energy and one is higher than energy
can't make two that are both lower in
energy and a bond order of 1 means
constructive interference is generated a
one bonding orbital that's not what a
bond order of one is and again every
time you but generate a bonding orbital
you generate an antibonding orbital and
one means that you have twice as many
electrons in your bonding orbitals as
antibonding orbitals because the formula
is half the number of bonding minus
antibonding but that's good and it's
important to remember that Sigma
orbitals are symmetric around the bond
axis alright so we had these diagrams
for boron and carbon just talking about
these the interactions
of the PX and py and so we had forgotten
about our PZ and you can't do that on a
test to get into trouble so I'm always
telling people for these two handouts
you must include the molecular orbitals
that are derived from P to Z so on a
test you need to put them even if
they're empty even if they don't have
anything in them they need to be part of
your molecular orbital diagram we didn't
have them in the diagram because we
hadn't talked about them yet so now
we're going to talk about them
so two PZ orbitals again this is an on
Mondays handout you have this linear
combination of atomic orbitals so now
and you know all our P orbitals they all
look the same as each other they're just
different in orientation you have one
along x1 along Y 1 along Z but they're
the same so now we're going to bring our
two PZ orbitals together and we're going
to do it along the bonding axis so we've
defined this as the bonding axis in the
class so we'll bring them together and
they'll be constructive interference
with our bonding orbitals there's always
constructive interference that generates
bonding orbitals and so we're going to
create a enhanced amplitude as the wave
functions come together and it's going
to be cylindrical symmetric so what type
of orbital do you think this is going to
be Sigma or pi it'll be Sigma because
it's cylindrical asymmetric so we do not
have any bonding plane along the bond
axis and it's it's symmetric around and
we have enhanced probability density and
we have a wave function squared enhance
probability of having an electron
between the two nuclei and so this is a
sigma 2p z so P orbitals can form Sigma
molecular orbitals so we do have nodes
passing through our nuclei here are our
nuclei again we do have them they were
here before in our P orbitals there's a
nodal plane
in our p-orbitals but we do not have in
this case a node along the bond axis so
that is our bonding so whenever you
generate a bonding orbital which is
lower going to be lower in energy we're
gonna have our increased amplitude
between the nuclei again our increased
probability density and therefore lower
energy so whenever you have constructive
interference generating a molecular
orbital of lower energy god creates
something of higher energy that's just
how life works so we also are going to
have antibonding orbitals which are
generated by destructive interference
and again these orbitals can be thought
about as wave functions in a property of
waves is that they constructively
interfere and destructively interfere so
now we can subtract our two orbitals
which base yours going to switch the
sign and have they're gonna be out of
phase so they'll destructively interfere
and that's gonna look like this so now
you're gonna generate a nodal plane
between the two nuclei but it's still
symmetric around the bond axis so this
is a sigma 2pz star so it's an
antibonding orbital so again it's Sigma
so it's still cylindrically symmetrical
with no nodal plane along that bond axis
but you do have a new nodal plane that's
generated so nodes pass again through
the nuclei but also now between these
two orbitals so we have a new nodal
plane that's generated that's between
these nuclei and that's a result of
destructive interference generates that
nodal plane you have decreased
probability density for a nucleus via an
electron being found there and so that
poor electrons kind of shut out of that
sweet spot the electrons like to be
between those two nuclei where they have
the two positive charges in the nucleus
and then their little negative charge
and they can sit right there and be very
happy in a low energy state but here
there's really lower probability density
lower likelihood the electron will be
found here and that generates the
molecular orbital that's antibonding or
higher in energy all right so now we
have to go back to our mo diagrams and
figure out where to put these new
molecular orbitals on to our nice
diagrams and it's not as simple as it
was before because where we put these
new sigma 2pz molecular orbitals depends
on what Z is so it depends on the value
of Z so if Z is less than the magic
number of 8 then we have our pi 2px and
2py orbitals are lower in energy than
our sigma 2pz
molecular orbital but if we are equal to
or greater than 8 then the sigma 2pz
orbital is lower in energy than the pi
2px and 2py so less than 8 pi is first
its lower in energy as you go up your
energy scale and if Z is equal to or
greater than 8 pi is second and Sigma is
first so how are you going to remember
this there could be many different ways
one can remember if it I'll tell you how
I remember it and I sort of my life
revolves around my daughter and my dog
and so at Thanksgiving we always have
the question can I eat pie first so if
you are under the age of eight you
always want your pie first so if Z is
less than eight pi comes first pi is
lower in energy and Sigma is higher
however when you mature to the grand age
of nine say or ten if you were a kid ten
is like the oldest you can possibly
imagine being very mature and you can
eat your Thanksgiving dinner and wait
for pie so that is how I would remember
it under eight pie is first equal to
eight or greater you can wait till after
dinner to have your pie pie comes second
note that the ordering of the
anti-bonding orbital's is the same so
all you have to remember is down here
depends on Z is pie first or is pie
second so let's take a look at an
example let's look at our friend
molecular oxygen that has a Z equal to 8
so oxygen is at the old mature age of 8
and so it's going to have its sigma 2pz
first it can wait for its PI orbitals
until later so let's start putting in
our electrons so we have each oxygen
making up molecular oxygen or o2 brings
two 2's orbitals to the Thanksgiving
dinner table and two of them go down in
energy into the bonding Sigma 2's
orbital and to go into our antibonding
Sigma star 2's orbital now we have 4
electrons in our PZ orbitals in our
atomic PZ orbitals 4 from each molecule
so we need to put all of those in so we
always start with the lowest energy
orbital so we'll put 2 in there then
we'll go up we have 2 more here 2 more
here we'll put them in singly with their
spins parallel and then we'll pair them
up in the lowest energy orbitals and
then we have 2 more left
so we're gonna have to put those up in
our antibonding orbitals so they go into
pi 2px and pi 2py star orbitals up here
alright so now we can calculate the bond
order for oxygen and that's a clicker
question
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
all right so let's take a look over here
so bond order again is half the number
of bonding electrons minus the number of
antibonding electrons and we have 8
bonding 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 and we have 4
antibonding 1 2 3 4 so that gives us a
bond order of 2 and the bond order
equation is one that you do have to
memorize that will not be given to you
on an exam and with a bond order of two
we have a pretty big number for
dissociation energy again that's the
energy you have to put into a bond to
break it to dissociate it and that means
it's a pretty strong bond if it's a big
number if you need a lot of energy
that's a strong bond another thing that
you can see from this diagram is that Oh
2 is a bi radical it has two lone pair
electrons so two unpaired electrons
which also makes it paramagnetic or
attracted to a magnetic field so
whenever you have unpaired electrons you
will have a paramagnetic species and
diamagnetic means they're all paired and
so there's some questions on problem
sets and on exams so you need to know
the definitions of those alright so we
talked about this when we're doing Lewis
structures if you recall and we drew a
beautiful lewis structure of molecular
oxygen that had two lone pairs on each
oxygen and a double bond but i told you
that that was not really a complete
description of molecular oxygen that
molecular oxygen was actually a by
radical but you would not get a hint of
that from the Lewis structure so if you
draw the Lewis structure as a by radical
then you have single electron here and a
single electron there and a single bond
but we also see the bond order as 2 so
this one does describes the by radical
in the
but doesn't really describe that
double-bond character that it has so
neither of these Lewis structures really
completely describe molecular orbital a
molecular oxygen and we need a molecular
orbital diagram to really help us
understand the properties of molecular
oxygen that it's pretty strong bond
between it and has double bond character
but it also is very reactive it's a by
radical so this is just a bizarre
molecule and really that is why this
diagram right here really tells us why
our life our planet is what it is right
here that describes it it's because of
oxygen that we have the life forms that
we did life was very different on this
planet before molecular oxygen came
about you did have microbes that lived
anaerobically without oxygen
but when oxygen cane everything changed
and so here this if you said can you
explain life to me you can draw this and
though there it is this explains life as
we know it because life as we know it
exists because of this crazy molecule
that is o2 nothing else really like it
it is an amazing molecule that allows us
to live so there you go so I say you
don't learn anything in chemistry this
diagram I just explained life as we know
it to you right there all right we also
it's not just odd there's a few other
elements that yeah are pretty important
and one of them is nitrogen we wouldn't
really be matched anywhere without
nitrogen either oxygen is no nitrogen is
pretty special too okay this this also
helps maybe these two molecular orbital
diagrams really sum up life as we know
it alright so let's look at molecular
nitrogen n2 so we have two electrons in
our two s orbitals so we're going to
bring them together we're gonna put two
in the lower energy orbital our Sigma 2
s + 2 and our antibonding orbital and
then we have three in our p orbitals
from this nitrogen 3 electrons from this
nitrogen
and so we'll put them down here we'll
put in two three four five six so we
didn't need to use any of these
anti-bonding orbital's and this is a Z
less than eight case so here we have our
PI orbitals first because it is Z less
than eight so let's look at the bond
order here and the bond order is half of
eight one two three four five six seven
eight eight bonding electrons and just
these two antibonding electrons so 1/2
of 8 minus 2 is 3 and you have a really
big number for your dissociation energy
941 this is a very stable molecule and
you can draw the lewis structure of this
without much difficulty this one works
quite well and you get a triple bond and
two lone pairs so this would be a
diamagnetic molecule no unpaired
electrons no no radicals here but this
is a crazy strong bond it's really hard
to split nitrogen because of this triple
bond and molecular orbital Theory just
tells you it should be a triple bond it
should be really really strong
interactions between these nitrogen's
and so this is a very hard thing we want
to do this industrially and we'll talk
more about this when we get to chemical
equilibrium how do you split the
nitrogen bond this is actually currently
a big area of research how you break
that bond because we need nitrogen for
life and so how do you split it there's
lots of nitrogen and two in the
atmosphere but we need it here and we
need it usable so we need to break that
bond to use it so we'll come back to
this in chemical equilibrium and how
people are able to split the nitrogen
bond so forget Man of Steel we should
have Man of nitrogen that's strong
nitrogen strong forget steel Man of
nitrogen okay one more thing to do
before we move on to today's handout and
this is really fast
you can also be asked to draw molecular
orbital diagrams where both atoms are
not the same so if you are asked to do
that you can use the following rules if
Z is less than 8 for both atoms pi is
first if Z is not less than 8 for both
atoms you don't really know what it's
hard to know what to do so you don't
need to know what to do and that's it ok
so we might tell you something about it
and then you can do it but otherwise
just just just worry about things when Z
is less than 8 so that's molecular
orbital Theory